.\" Time-stamp: <Mon Nov 24 19:15:58 EST 1997 ferguson>
.TH TTC 1 "3 June 1997" "TRIPS"
.SH NAME
ttc \- TRIPS TrueTalk client using AudioFile server
.SH SYNOPSIS
ttc [\-h\ host] [\-audio\ server] [\-speechrate\ FLOAT] [\-debug\ where]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.I Ttc
is a TrueTalk (tm) client for use with the TRIPS system. That is, it
connects to a TrueTalk server to provide speech generation services
for TRIPS. This version of
.I ttc
uses either the AudioFile server for network audio facilities or the
local Sun audio device.
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
.IP "-h host"
Connect to the TrueTalk server running on
.IR host .
The default is find it on the current host. The server must be running
and ready to accept connections before
.I ttc
starts (see USAGE, below).
.IP "-audio server"
Specifies audio server or device. If
.I server
is a string starting with a slash ("/"), then it is taken to be the
pathname of the local audio device, which is opened and used for
output. Otherwise
.I server
is taken to be the name of the AudioFile server to which to connect.
The default is the value of the environment variable AUDIOFILE, if
set, otherwise a local AudioFile server. To use the audio device, you
must explicitly pass this argument.
.IP "-speechrate FLOAT"
Specifies a speaking rate between 0 and 2.0, relative to the default
of 1.0. Lower numbers mean faster speech.
.IP "-debug where"
Specify that copious debugging information should be written to
.IR where .
If
.I where
is a hyphen ("-"), output is to stderr, if it starts with a pipe ("|")
the rest of the argument is passed to
.IR popen (3),
otherwise it is taken to be a filename to which to write. Be careful
to escape pipes and spaces from the shell.
.SH USAGE
.PP
The TrueTalk server must be running before
.I ttc
starts. Within TRIPS, this is usually accomplished by the
.IR tspeechout (1)
script. However, if you wanted to do it yourself, you could run
the following commands:

.nf
.na
    % setenv TT_BASE /s5/truetalk/tts.r1.`uname -s`.`uname -r`
    % $TT_BASE/bin/tts -server -i
.ad
.fi

That is, you need to set the environment variable TT_BASE, then run
.I tts
in server mode (\-i sets incremental mode). The example above is based
on the TrueTalk installation at the time this manpage was written.
.PP
For this version of
.IR ttc ,
you must also be running the AudioFile server. Again, this will
normally be taken care of when
.I ttc
is used in the TRIPS system, however to run it by hand you can do:

.nf
.na
    % /u/trains/AF/bin/Asparc10 -rate 16000 &
.ad
.fi

You might of course need to run a different AudioFile server,
depending on the platform. For example, 
.IR Asparc
(without the "10") would be used for Suns that don't have speakerbox
audio.
.PP
With both servers running, you can then run
.IR ttc ,
specifying the server host using "-h" if necessary (if you ran the
TrueTalk server on another machine).
.I Ttc
listens for KQML messages on its standard input, as described below,
and outputs KQML error and reply messages to its standard output.
.SH "TTC MESSAGES"
.PP
The following KQML messages are understood by
.IR ttc .
They
should be addressed with ":receiver SPEECH-OUT". Case is insignificant
outside of strings. Whitespace between messages is ignored (but rigorously
enforced within messages according to the KQML spec).
.IP "(request :content (say STRING))"
Sender is requesting that
.I STRING
be passed to TrueTalk (i.e., "spoken"). When the speech has been
generated and the audio has finished playing,
.I ttc
will reply with a message of the form:

.nf
.na
    (reply :sender SPEECH-OUT :content (done))
.ad
.fi

Any :reply-with in the original message will be used in the reply.
.IP "(request :content (exit :status N))"
Requests that
.I ttc
exit with status
.I N
(default 0). This usually causes the TrueTalk server to exit also.
.IP "(request :content (chdir DIR))"
Ignored.
.IP "(request :content (show\-window))"
Ignored.
.IP "(request :content (hide\-window))"
Ignored.
.IP "(request :content (start\-conversation :name N :lang L :sex S))"
Ignored.
.IP "(request :content (end\-conversation)"
Ignored.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
AUDIOFILE			HOST:DEVICE for AudioFile server
.SH FILES
.PP
None.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.PP
Perhaps.
.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
trips(1),
tspeechout(1),
tts(1)
.SH BUGS
.PP
It seems that the AudioFile sometimes needs to re-sync it's clocks,
and I suspect that this may cause the client playback to get lost. It
shouldn't last more than one utterance, but I think I may have seen it
get more confused.
.SH AUTHOR
.PP
George Ferguson (ferguson@cs.rochester.edu).


